docs: add in depth development doc sections (#9250)
owncloud/web: docs/development/repo-structure.md

---
title: "Repo structure and (published) packages"
date: 2022-01-28T00:00:00+00:00
weight: 30
geekdocRepo: https://github.com/owncloud/web
geekdocEditPath: edit/master/docs/development
geekdocFilePath: repo-structure.md
---

{{< toc >}}

> ## Repo structure

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Repository Structure
```

From a developers perspective the most important parts of the [ownCloud Web repo](https://github.com/owncloud/web) are the following files and folders:

> ### dev folder and docker-compose.yml file

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### dev Folder and docker-compose.yml File
```

The `/dev` folder contains all the configuration files that are needed in the `docker-compose.yml` file. This docker compose stack
contains all the backend and testing related infrastructure that is needed for an out of the box usable localhost development setup,
as described in the [tooling section]({{< ref "tooling.md" >}}).

> ### docs folder

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### docs Folder
```

> Within the `/docs` folder you will find all the documentation source documents that get published to [the dev docs](https://owncloud.dev/clients/web/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Within the `/docs` folder you will find all the documentation source documents that get published to the [dev docs](https://owncloud.dev/clients/web/).
```

> ### packages folder

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### packages Folder
```

We're using the [ownCloud Web repo](https://github.com/owncloud/web) as a mono repo. It contains a variety of packages. Some of them get 
published to [npmjs.com](https://npmjs.com), others define the core packages, apps and extensions that are the foundation of 
the `ownCloud Web` release artifact.

> Having these packages side by side within the `/packages` folder of the repo is possible because of a `pnpm` feature called `Workspaces`.

Reviewer 2: Maybe worth linking pnpm docs for workspaces

> ### tests

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### tests Folder
```

For historic reasons there are two end-to-end test collections in the ownCloud Web project. The older one lives in `/tests/acceptance`, 
using [Nightwatch.js](https://nightwatchjs.org). The newer one lives in `/tests/e2e`, using [Playwright](https://playwright.dev).
We're slowly moving away from the nightwatch.js based e2e tests. As our coverage with playwright based e2e tests grows continuously it might
be that you will not find the `/tests/acceptance` folder anymore. If that's the case at the time of reading this, those are happy times.
You're more than welcome to make a pull request and adjust this section of the docs accordingly. :-)

The rest of the folder contains helpers and configuration files for our automated testing infrastructure.

You can read more about testing in our [testing section]({{< ref "../testing/_index.md" >}})

> ### package.json file

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### package.json File
```

This is probably no surprise: the root level `package.json` file defines the project information, build scripts, dependencies and some more details.
Each package in `/packages` can and most likely will contain another `package.json` which does the same for the respective package.

### vite.config.ts

> We're working with [Vite](https://vitejs.dev) as a local development  server and build tool. `vite.config.ts` is the main configuration file for that.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We're working with [Vite](https://vitejs.dev) as a local development server and build tool. `vite.config.ts` is the main configuration file for that.
```

You can read more about the usage in our [tooling section]({{< ref "tooling.md" >}}).

## (Published) Packages

Each package in the `/packages` folder can - not exclusively, but most commonly - consist of 
- source code (`/src`),
- unit tests (`/tests`),
- translations (`/l10n`) and
- a `package.json` file for package specific details and dependencies

> ### code style and build config

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Code Style and Build Config
```

transformed so that you can deal with more useful objects. The web-client package gets published 
on npmjs.com as [@ownclouders/web-client](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@ownclouders/web-client).

A dedicated documentation for the `web-client` package is not available, yet, since our extension system is still work in progress.

### web-pkg

The web-pkg package (`/packages/web-pkg`) is a collection of opinionated components, composables, types and other helpers that aim
at making your app and extension developer experience as easy and seamless as possible. The web-pkg package gets published on
npmjs.com as [@ownclouders/web-pkg](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@ownclouders/web-pkg).

A dedicated documentation for the `web-pkg` package is not available, yet, since our extension system is still work in progress.

### web-runtime

At the very heart of ownCloud Web, the `web-runtime` is responsible for dependency injection, app bootstrapping, configuration, 
authentication, data preloading and much more.
It is very likely that you will never get in touch with it, as most of the developer facing features are exposed via `web-pkg`. If you

> have more questions about this package, please join us with questions in our [public chat](https://talk.owncloud.com/channel/web)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
have more questions about this package, please join our [public chat](https://talk.owncloud.com/channel/web) and simply ask
```

or write an issue in our [issue tracker](https://github.com/owncloud/web/issues).

> ### Standalone core apps

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Standalone Core Apps
```

Both `web-app-admin-settings` and `web-app-files` are standalone apps which are bundled with the default ownCloud Web release artifact.

> ### Viewer and editor apps

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Viewer and Editor Apps
```

Apps which fall into the categories `viewer` or `editor` can be opened from the context of a file or folder. This mostly happens from
within the `files` app. We currently bundle the following apps with the default ownCloud Web release artifact:
- `web-app-draw-io` an editor for `.drawio` files
- `web-app-external` an iframe integration of all the apps coming from the [app provider](https://owncloud.dev/services/app-provider/) 
   (e.g. OnlyOffice, Collabora Online and others)
- `web-app-pdf-viewer` a viewer for `.pdf` files, which relies on native PDF rendering support from the browser
- `web-app-preview` a viewer for various media files (audio / video / image formats)
- `web-app-text-editor` a simple editor for `.txt`, `.md` and other plain text files

> If you're interested in writing your own viewer or editor app for certain file types please get in touch with us for more info.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you're interested in writing your own viewer or editor app for certain file types, please get in touch with us for more info.
```

the [design system documentation](https://owncloud.design).

The ownCloud Design System is a standalone project, but to make development easier we have the code in our mono repo.
We're planning to publish it on npmjs.com as [@ownclouders/design-system](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@ownclouders/design-system)
as soon as possible. Since it's bundled with ownCloud Web, you should not bundle it with your app or extension.

### web-client

The client package (`/packages/web-client`) serves as an abstraction layer for the various ownCloud APIs, like
[LibreGraph](https://owncloud.dev/apis/http/graph/), [WebDAV](https://doc.owncloud.com/server/next/developer_manual/webdav_api/) and
[OCS](https://doc.owncloud.com/server/next/developer_manual/core/apis/ocs-capabilities.html). The package provides TypeScript
interfaces for various entities (like files, folders, shares and spaces) and makes sure that raw API responses are properly
transformed so that you can deal with more useful objects. The web-client package gets published
on npmjs.com as [@ownclouders/web-client](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@ownclouders/web-client).

> A dedicated documentation for the `web-client` package is not available, yet, since our extension system is still work in progress.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Dedicated documentation for the `web-client` package is not available, yet, since our extension system is still work in progress.
```

### web-pkg

The web-pkg package (`/packages/web-pkg`) is a collection of opinionated components, composables, types and other helpers that aim
at making your app and extension developer experience as easy and seamless as possible. The web-pkg package gets published on
npmjs.com as [@ownclouders/web-pkg](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@ownclouders/web-pkg).

> A dedicated documentation for the `web-pkg` package is not available, yet, since our extension system is still work in progress.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Dedicated documentation for the `web-pkg` package is not available, yet, since our extension system is still work in progress.
```
